pacific_quarto_report

Climate Risk: A New Era for the South Pacific

In the morning of 13 March, 2015 more than 2000 people were sheltering in evacuation centres.  Disaster was on its way.   That evening, Cyclone Pam struck Vanuatu, one of the largest island nations in the South Pacific, with extremely destructive force.  Winds reaching 250kmph ripped off metal roofs from houses and schools.  Communications and power went down.  Agriculture and food stocks became debris.   The devastation across the archipelago was unprecedented, affecting approximately 188,000 people (over half the population), with up to 90% of buildings in the capital, Port Vila, damaged or destroyed.   Total estimated economic losses reached $449 million (roughly 64% of Vanuatu’s GDP).

Image: cyclone_pam_disaster


By and large, the Pacific Region is one of the most vulnerable regions in the world.  Constant friction between the Australian and Pacific tectonic plates trigger earthquakes and volcanic activity.   Shifts in ocean currents and weather patterns such as El Niño generate cyclones and droughts.   But all of this is old news to Pacific Islanders.  What has changed?

During the last decade, disasters affecting large proportions of the population across Melanesia and Micronesia have become more frequent.  Tuvalu and Tonga in Polynesia seem to reflect this new pattern too.   Based on my data analysis, it seems like the arrival of Cyclone Pam back in 2015 marked the beginning of a new era of more frequent and devastating disasters.   

Only a year after Pam’s arrival, Winston paid a visit, one of the most intense tropical cyclones ever recorded in the Southern Hemisphere.  After making an unusual loop down its path, it gained strength and directly hit Viti Levu, Fiji’s largest island.   The human and economic toll were catastrophic:  more than half a million people were affected and economic losses reached 10% of GDP. 
 
Fig 1: “Pacific Disasters:  A New Era”

Fig 2: “Unprecedented Economic Damage”

According to experts, “exceptionally warm” ocean temperatures above average, driven by El Niño and climate change, allowed Winston to intensify quickly and maintain its Category 5-level strength.   

People in the Pacific know El Niño all too well - a recurring climate pattern driven by shifts in the winds above the eastern Pacific that spreads heavy rains, droughts, heatwaves and wildfires; this powerful event alters the weather all around the world.  The strength of any particular El Niño is measured by how much sea temperatures rise above average.  The 2015-2016 edition was exceptional; nurturing strong tropical storms such as Winston.  But again, nothing new here for Pacific Islanders. 

The data shows another important milestone for the South Pacific reached in 2015.  For years, sea temperatures have been rising steadily - from global warming; yet in 2015, the first temperature anomaly > 1°C was recorded near the island of Kiribati.   Ever since, there’s been four more anomalies at that level.  Perhaps a new era of warmer sea waters.  Although climate change and El Niño are not associated with each other, they feed into each other.   The knock-on effect for people living in the South Pacific is warmer sea temperatures and a greater risk of cyclones such as Pam and Winston that can upend the lives of so many people and bring unprecedented damage to the economies that sustain them. 

Fig 3:  “Hot Water”



The message is clear: climate change is the single greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and well-being of the peoples of the Pacific.   
What are the lessons from Pam and Winston? How can the Pacific South prepare for this new era?   
